James D Eugenio is the editor and
publisher of Kennedy's and King comm and
he's the author of JFK the evidence
today he's also a noted researcher of
the Martin Luther King jr. assassination
and that's what we're going to talk
about today if people are aware there
was a civil trial in 1999 led by the
King family in which the jury found that
the assassination was a result of a
conspiracy I've been wanting to talk
about this case for a long time so I
found an article that Jim wrote at the
time about the media's reaction to the
trials outcome it's sort of a timeless
subject to see how the press deals with
events that run counter to their
narratives and Jim is always brilliant
at dissecting the trope that the media
uses to kind of get around things that
run counter to what they want to say so
that's what we're gonna discuss today
but it's a it's a wider subject and I
think we're gonna go a lot of places
with it but thank you Jim for for
talking today David yeah the article
that you wanted to base this on
interview around was in pro magazine in
January February issue of 2000 and I
wrote the article and it's about the
media's treatment of the conspiracy
verdict in the civil trial in Memphis
conducted by William pepper in December
of 1999
so William pepper who was James Earl
Ray's lawyer and who was a acquaintance
of dr. King now the remarkable thing
about the treatment of the verdict is
this the mainstream media did not have
any reporter there for anywhere near
close to a whole expanse of the trial
and I know this for a fact because James
Douglas who was reporting on the trial
for probe magazine and who filed his
report with us a few months earlier okay
I'm back I think they were prior issue
all right he was there every day Jim
Douglas is the author of JFK and the
unspeakable chairman of local friend he
knew from Memphis were the only people
there for the majority of the days of
the
all right and he said nobody was here
not one other single person was there
every single day and most of reporters
were there for two or three days and
then left so here's my question how on
earth do you discuss a trial where you
didn't have reporter there well this is
something that was really kind of
startling even for the MSM so we decided
to go ahead and round up these views of
the trial and prepare an article for
them about them rather for probe okay
and so which is what we did to New York
Times well before you uh can you just
kind of briefly tell what you know what
the facts of or the trial and just
briefly what they what they found just
for people who are here with us the
trial itself the trial itself was what
has termed the civil trial okay which
means one private party is suing another
private party over what's called damages
all right so in this particular case it
was the King family bringing the charges
against a man named Lloyd ours who owned
the tavern in Memphis at the time now
in 1993 Loyd Jowers had gone on national
television with Sam Donaldson on ABC and
talked about his part in a conspiracy to
kill Martin Luther King and he said that
his role was to receive the murder
weapon from Gnaeus up from the guy
running the show all right and then give
it to an assassin and then have the
assassin give the rifle back to him and
then he would go ahead and give it back
to his aider and abettor would giving it
to him in the first place all right
now as time went on william pepper
worked more and more on this angle and
by around 1996 1997 he was ready to go
ahead and reopen the king case in a
criminal trial
in a criminal trial in other words to
state versus defendant on a murder
charge and so he actually did try and
get the case reopened upon two sets of
new evidence
one was the jurors presentation the
other one was forensic ly to try and
show that the murder weapon in evidence
was not the weapon that was used to kill
King well what happened was what the
people in Memphis did not want to happen
in other words the power brokers and
Memphis did not want this happened the
John's that the case was assigned to
Judge Joe Brown actually was in sympathy
with pepper trying to reopen the case
Judge Joe Brown is the later became
famous TV judge but he's a very
interesting character I think if you
have a chance
Leno sanik of black-op radio at black-op
radio calm has several good interviews
of him in his back catalogue if you go
to his website and can find those
interviews and get your hands on those
they're really excellent I suggest
people listen to those and so he
actually was going to go ahead and
sanction rifle tests to see if the rifle
of an evidence was actually the rifle
used to kill King so they did a round of
tests and they came back inconclusive
there was a scar in the track of the
rifle on these tests that was not
reported in the first round of tests
done by the FBI all right it was it was
hard to explain how that got there so
judge Brown was gonna sanction a second
round of tests you know did the scar
come from a buildup of residue in the
rifle in the intervening years because
if it didn't then it's not the rifle
that killed King all right because that
wasn't there and so Brown said okay this
is what we're gonna do we're gonna go
ahead and have a solution a chemical
solution which will not damage your
rifle Bearer at all and we're going to
use
that to clean the rifle barrow and then
we're gonna retest and if the scar is
still there okay then I don't think we
have a match
well when judge Brown said he was gonna
do that the city of Memphis rose up in
rebellion against him the local DA's
office the state attorney general okay
the meet the major media the Memphis
commercial appeal and to make a long
story short what ended up happening was
that the same thing that happened at Jim
Garrison back in 1967 on the Kennedy
case the same thing that happened to
Richard Sprague in 1976 on the JFK case
and the same thing that happened with
Gary Webb in the late 1990s on the CIA
and crack cocaine so what happened was
that when Brown was on vacation there
was a kind of unauthorized invasion of
his office by guy named Roberts in
cahoots with a judge named Colton Colton
was the guy whose court the original
case was assigned to way back there in
1969 but during a routine rotation it
had been assigned to brown in the 90s
well Colton and Roberts went ahead and
hijacked the files out of Judge Browns
chambers while he was on vacation judge
Brown was very angry about this he
blamed in a local Republican politics
but this was more or less the beginning
of the end okay for Brown's
reinvestigation of the Kennedy case
she's mad that Martin Luther King murder
case and so once he got back he was
removed from the case by the appeals
court the local prosecutor Campbell was
overjoyed at this okay because now the
case would not have to be reopened and
he wouldn't have to go ahead and retry
the case on a criminal ground all right
now I
adhere that when this happened when the
criminal case was finished in Memphis it
more or less coincided with the death of
James Earl Ray okay he passed away
around this same time period okay and
now all the great work that bill pepper
had done on this case you need he wrote
that good book orders to kill he had
done all this wonderful research you
know in in Memphis found these new
witnesses you know and it seemed you
know that it was now essentially gonna
go down the drain because now of course
there was no defendant and the case as
far as being conspiracy was pretty much
wrapped up in Memphis so the purse the
people you have to give the credit to
for keeping the thing going and getting
it into a civil court is the family of
Martin Luther King I don't there's any
question about that all right
they decided to go ahead with the case
and they decided to file a civil suit in
Memphis against Jowers and this trial
took place in the latter part of 1999 I
believe in November and December of 1999
I think the verdict came in on December
the 8th okay of 1999 and there's
actually a book that contains the entire
transcript of the trial it's called the
thirteenth juror all right uh and a
literal cascade of information came out
at this trial I mean it's it's it's
really kind of incredible you know when
you go ahead and look at all the great
stuff you know that that um pepper was
able to introduce into the court record
all right I mean it's really I mean just
to give you some highlights all right
there's a fascinating
a couple of witnesses by the name of
Floyd Newsome okay and Eadie read it all
right and a third one Gary Williams who
testified how somebody called off to
private bodyguards that King usually had
when he came to that city and they all
said they really don't know how the heck
could happen all right
but whenever King had come to Memphis
and he had been there before a few weeks
earlier of course for the sanitation
workers strike he had his own private
security detail he also had a
surveillance detail okay that his people
would just watch out from across the
street to see if anything was coming up
well that whole detail was called off on
this particular visit now what pepper
did at the trial is he coupled that
evidence with the testimony of a man
named Leon Cowan who was a friend with
the manager of the Lorraine Motel Walter
Bailey and Colin testified that Bailey
received a call from a member of dr.
King's group in Atlanta the night before
he arrived in Memphis and the request
was to change King's room Bailey was not
interested in doing that and that he
didn't want to do it but the guy
insisted that they wanted to change the
room from an inner courtyard room all
right to an outside balcony room now I
don't have to tell you how important
that is okay
I think anybody who knows anything about
the King case understands how important
that is because if the room had not been
changed then the assassination could not
have taken place at least not the way
that it actually did from allegedly a
rifleman across the street hitting King
as he comes out to the balcony of his
room so -
when you couple the stripping of the
security with the changing of the room
well things start getting really kind of
fishy don't they
alright so in other words now what
pepper did is he went ahead and he began
to bring witnesses in who questioned the
official story of where the fatal shot
came from all right
see if you believe the Memphis
authorities the shot came from a place
called Bessie's boarding house which is
right above Jim's grill which was a ours
place okay
and it came from a communal bathroom
okay about something like about 280 feet
away well first of all who the heck
would everyone to use a communal
bathroom to fun if you're an assassin
because what that means of course is
that anybody could knock on the door or
come in and you and want to use the
bathroom or be waiting for you okay when
you ran out all right right okay and so
I mean that's got to be one of the
dumbest things I've ever heard of all
right okay so what pepper did is he
brought in about three witnesses who
disagreed with the location of the shot
coming from Bessey's a rooming house and
these were Earl Caldwell a former New
York Times reporter okay was one of them
Solomon Jones who was King the chauffer
driver okay and Maynard Stiles who his
testimony was really interesting
first of all Caldwell and and Jones both
said they thought the shot came from
below the balcony these bushes below the
balcony now
Maynard Stiles received a phone call the
next morning saying and that the bushes
had to all be trimmed and cut down get
this the next morning he gets an order
from the department you know the parks
the far
and saying we want all the bushes
trimmed and cut down so in other words
the next morning they weren't there so
in other words the idea of trying to say
that the shot came from the bushes below
was now really hard to make stick
because there weren't any bushes okay
this is the crime scene they're
uprooting the crime scene yes really
something the next step in the trial was
and by the way I think you're being
understand why the media didn't want to
talk about this trial okay was the
testimony of a guy named Arthur Haynes
okay
Arthur Haynes was going to be James Earl
Ray's original attorney me all right and
he was gonna defend him back in 1968
eventually what happened is that James
Earl Ray made a terrible mistake and he
got rid of Haynes and replaced him with
Percy Foreman which as Ray later said
was probably the biggest mistake I ever
made in my life all right
but he was prepared to go to trial which
firm Forman was not going to do and so
Haynes decided to do some investigation
which Forman did not do and he found a
witness by the name of guy Connie p--
who owned a five and dime store okay
underneath Bessey's boardinghouse and he
said because the strongest evidence
against Ray was that he so he's he
supposedly dropped a bundle of his
belongings as he was running from the
scene okay and this included the rifle
right well knie said to Haynes cuz that
bundle was on my foyer my exterior foyer
10 minutes before the shot went on all
right now you don't get very much better
evidence than that okay in other words
somebody was trying to frame James Earl
Ray by depositing that his items there
now another very interesting
is that they produced okay was a man
named William Hamblin who knew a cab
driver named James McGraw James McGraw
was called to Betsy's boarding house to
pick up a guy named Charlie Stephens
okay this was around the time of King's
assassination he is supposed to drive
him home because a guy was stoned drunk
he said that when he went into the room
to try and pick up Charlie Stephens that
he looked into the communal bathroom
across the way he said the door was wide
open okay there was nobody there at that
particular time all right and he said
Charlie Stephens was dead drunk okay
well of course Charlie Stephens is a guy
who was gonna identify Rey as the
assassin coming out of that bathroom for
the authorities in order to get him sent
back from London to the United States
how could he identify him the guy was
dead drunk now
there was also evidence at the trial
produced about the mysterious guy named
Raul Raul is the guy who James Earl Ray
said that he met up in Canada okay
in 1967 and Raul hired him in Montreal
rather in Montreal Canada in the summer
of 1967 and Ray said he hired him to do
odd jobs for him
you know like delivering things picking
things up okay and he would do this all
throughout the country from the east
coast to the west coast and so the whole
idea was to try and locate Raul because
jurors said that the guy who dropped off
the rifle to him
on the day of the assassination was
werewolf okay the same guy and so what
happened is that pepper decided to go
ahead and try and find other witnesses
who knew of this guy named Raul all
right and had had seen him before and to
see it
witnesses all matched up and they ended
up doing that all right in fact pepper
went ahead and he found at least three
witnesses okay who went ahead who
identified the very same picture of this
guy named Earl Warren to the point that
pepper actually thought that he found
reward okay who was our living eye it
was either New York or Philadelphia in
1997 but he would never answer the door
he would always send his daughter you
know or his wife to Hampshire the door
he would never answer the door to be
interviewed if that's not good enough
for you there is also there was also
some very interesting evidence
introduced about the role of the
military intelligence in the stalking
and perhaps a shooting of King Douglas
Valentine is a pretty prominent author
about CIA operations who wrote a book
called the Phoenix program in 1990 that
of course was about the notorious
program in Vietnam to snuff out and
torture and kill sympathizers to the
Vietcong all right well when he was
doing that book Doug talked with some
veterans who had been redeployed okay
from Indochina to do surveillance on 60s
anti-war movement in the United States
and he found out that the Army's 111th
military intelligence group kept King
under 24-hour a day surveillance its
agents were actually there in Memphis in
April of that year when King was killed
all right and from his information they
reportedly washed and took photos while
Kings assassin moved in the position
fired and walked away there are a couple
things there's the Doug Valentine
interview on Porkins policy radio which
I will put a link to in the comments now
what's so interesting about that
is that also produced the trial was a
guy named kartha Whedon who was a
captain of fire station across the
street from the Lorraine Motel the place
where King was killed down all right he
testified that he was on duty the
morning of the 4th April 4th and to u.s.
army officers approached him and they
wanted to look out for the motel they
carried briefcases and indicated they
had cameras so kartha would Dean shuttin
of the roof to fire station he left them
at the edge of the northeast corner
behind the parapet wall and from the air
course who had a bird's-eye view of the
motel so in other words this matches the
honest scene evidence matches with the
information that duck Valentine had dug
up all right so that's that's very very
interesting and a lot of people would
consider it quite powerful he also got a
guy named Jack Terrell who had worked
for the CIA during the illegal war
against Nicaragua who knew a friend of
his a guy named JD hill all right and JD
JD hill okay
had actually been a member of the Army
sniper team that was supposed to shoot a
so-called unknown target on April the
4th they were supposed to take up
positions in Memphis but that mission
was suddenly canceled ok and when he
heard what happened to King the next day
he realized what he was going to be
there for all right so all of this stuff
came out including and I have to mention
this as the final summary of the trial a
guy named Walter Fauntroy was a very
good friend of Kings he had worked for
the House Select Committee in the 1970s
and the House Select Committee did an
inquiry into both the King case and the
JFK case font ray font Roy said that
when he left Congress he had the
opportunity to read through the Luminess
files on the King assassination
including stuff he had never seen before
he said
this material that he saw were reports
from Jagger Hoover and he learned that
in the three weeks before King's murder
Hoover had a series of meetings with
people in the CIA and military
intelligence about the Phoenix operation
and so Phan Troy of course asked himself
what would Jake or Hoover be doing
having meetings about the Phoenix
operation if he's running the FBI in the
United States all right okay kind of
puzzling isn't it all right definitely
he also discovered that there had been
green like the other witnesses said that
there had been special agents and
military intelligence officers in
Memphis when King was killed so far I
decided that he was gonna write a book
on the subject and so when the word got
out that he was gonna write a book he
was investigated and charged by the
Justice Department about violating
financial reports as a member of
Congress all right his lawyer couldn't
believe this okay because this was a
technicality on a misstated check from
years before and so but they but he got
the message you know we'll get you for
something if you go ahead and write this
book so font-weight didn't write the
book and so that's how big the cover-up
is in Washington on this particular on
this particular case well as I said all
right as I said what happened is that
pepper ended up winning the case and in
fact the jury came in within two hours
after the presentation was over and they
said that there was a conspiracy in the
King case now I should add peppers
credit that's the second time he did
this because back in 1993 he had done
and I have to say this
very well done mock trial for I believe
was HBO and that mock trial on the King
case back then I thought was much better
than the one done later with Vincent
Bugliosi and Jerry Spence for Thames
television you know on the JFK case it
was
much more realistic alright and for
example in that particular case you
actually had James Earl Ray able to take
the stand you know and it was much more
of what you would actually have seen if
there had been a real trial so pepper
won that particular case and now he won
this particular case in 1999 and he was
robbed of his opportunity to actually do
the criminal case by the removal of
Judge Joe Brown so in other words the
guy had a pretty sparkling record so
after he won this civil trial the media
had to find a way to go ahead and
discount that because of course if it's
allowed to stand
it shows the public is right about this
stuff that James Earl Ray did not shoot
King that Lee Harvey Oswald did not
shoot JFK that Sirhan Sirhan did not
kill Robert Kennedy and so this would
have been another indication that all
those as they call him wacky conspiracy
theories are actually correct so what
did they do
number one they did not send any one
single reporter to the trial to stay
there day in and day out not one but
then they went ahead and by let me add
to that
not even the local newspaper right not
even the Memphis right to Memphis
commercial appeal not even the local
newspaper had their guy there every day
a guy named mark Fusco work I think his
name is Puss Korea okay um and so what
Jim told me and I go well Jim how did he
file these reports then he goes Jim Mark
Pierce Cahuilla was very very seldom in
the courtroom what mark would do is he
would wait all day outside and wait for
me to come out and then I would have to
brief him on what happened that day in
court
[Laughter]
so Jim Douglas was giving the Memphis
commercial appeal their information to
print on the King trial that's how bad I
mean to me nothing illustrates just how
bad the mainstream media is on these
cases but without having somebody there
they still have to find a way to go
ahead and discount what had happened
without reporting on it well the New
York Times decided to bury their story
on page 25 and they reported that what
does this mean you know there was a vast
conspiracy that it was alleged but not
proved ah I had to tell you David I
think what I just summarized is pretty
good proof that there was a pretty big
conspiracy in the King case you know but
if you don't report on it then you can
say that it was a vast conspiracy that
was alleged but not proved all right
well when the jury accepts it does not
that mean it's proof it don't know same
thing in the LA Times they placed a
story on page 24 and they also tried to
go ahead and discount the verdict they
even put their resident black scholar a
guy named Earl affari Hutchison he they
assigned him to write an editorial and
his column said that Bill pepper was one
of those has worked up to victim hit
angle especially hard and he said that
James Earl Ray himself had stoked
conspiracy flames by saying that he was
framed and recanting his guilty plea and
here it is here's the final summary by
Earl affari Hutchison
but despite the Memphis verdict the
evidence is irrefutable that Ray was a
triggerman now how you can come to that
conclusion without mentioning what went
on in the courtroom is really really
hard to believe but that's how you know
that's how extreme and that's how
uninformed and that is how stubborn
these people will be in order to stay
with the MSM you know then there was a
u.s. News & World Report okay who said
that William pepper was a man prone to
bizarre conspiracy theories and it said
the Shelby County DA's office was not at
the trial well of course not because it
was a civil trial it was not a criminal
trial so you're not gonna have they had
the office there all right then they got
another mainstream media guy David
Garrow
who wrote an article and said we don't
know who precisely aided in the bedded
Rae but anybody who doesn't accept her
as a gunman is from Waze Roswell New
Mexico you know well that that's an old
one isn't it
somehow if they believe in conspiracies
and you also believe in aliens coming
here from other planets you know you
know abductions and all this other stuff
you know right if you can believe
someone can be shot then you have to
believe in Martians and then and then if
you can believe it's a chop it all off
what happened they got Jerry Posner who
was not at the trial to go ahead and
visit all of the major shows to write a
column that was distributed you know
throughout the country going ahead and
criticizing the trial so III really
couldn't believe that all right but but
it really did happen oh all right this
is what he says okay the Memphis trial
wasn't a search for the truth
but a ploy to obtain a judicial sanction
for a convoluted conspiracy theory
embraced by the King family
I won't even comment on their the way
jabbers is a man considered to lack
credibility but every local state and
federal prosecutor who looked at the
matter that's what he says next and then
he says that only the state prosecutors
okay and their report in the case are
credible because they said there was no
conspiracy as I just mentioned earlier
in the show it was very obvious that
that the local DA's office was next
mention of the state DA's office did not
want to do the case at all because they
I think sensed that if Brown had been
allowed to go ahead and finish up the
rifle to us it would've been proven that
that particular weapon was not the
weapon to fired the bullet that killed
Martin Luther King all right and then he
says he has to get personal he says the
pursuit of genres by the Kings quote
will only diminish your standing as the
first family of civil rights and
permanently damage their credibility all
right so and then of course they
actually put him in a couple TV shows to
go ahead and and do the same thing and
then I don't remember anybody saying
were you with the trial Jerry okay I
don't remember anybody saying that they
never challenged his credentials to go
ahead and write about this a you know an
event that he had never seen alright so
that's how crazy this thing god and by
the way let me answer another point the
fact that the commercial appeal was not
there that meant that nobody was getting
any day-to-day updates you know while
the trial was going on because also as
Jim Douglas discovered Court TV it was
called Court TV back then it's called
true TV now they pulled out of the king
case three days before the trial began
they were gonna be set up to cover the
case so you would have had a video and
audio record you know of the case but
Jim told me Jim I couldn't believe it
three days before the guy said we're
pulling out you know I asked him I said
he didn't know why I mean isn't that
really bizarre
so anybody ever tells you that the media
in this country is not rigged that the
media in this country is not controlled
that the media in this country is not
one-sided this is a great great example
that that is all a bunch of BS and it's
all true okay this coverage of the King
case is wonderful evidence to prove
everything that we've been
all along about how bad the media is in
this country so I it was just just and
by the way I have to add when Jim
Garrison conducted his trial of clay
Shawn back in 1969 both the local papers
to States item and The Times Picayune
covered that trial in other words and
what I mean is this
they had a reporter right down there in
the courtroom every single day and they
would rotate the reporters and then when
the breaks came they would go ahead and
transfer their notes over the phone to
the to the main office of the newspaper
and then that is how the day-to-day
reports got in and I know this because I
talked to somebody who actually was a
Jack Dempsey who covered the trial and
so day by day you would get daily
reports okay if you wanted to watch that
trial and of course if you want to
subscribe from out of town
you could have followed a trial by
subscribing to their mail thing okay
their mailing the paper to you you
couldn't do that in this trial that was
such a disgrace
so thank God that the I think the King
family went ahead and I think they put
up the transcript on the the King
website okay or the other way you can
get it is from the that book the
thirteenth juror but Jim Douglas for
probe had the only contemporaneous
report on all that terrific evidence
that pepper was producing at that trial
and that is that is just an utter
disgrace that our little magazine you
know our little magazine that we did on
a five-and-dime budget okay was the only
place you could read a summary of the
King jours case because everything else
was this BS that I'm telling you about
or the Gerald Posner you know twisted
stuff you know from a guy wasn't even at
the trial okay and this is what I mean
about the media in this country
you know and so excuse me if I get a
little angry about it but you know I
think I'm pretty justified in getting
angry about it so this is a perfect
example you know of why people don't
believe the mainstream media anymore
because they deserve it right but and
this is the era of or that was in 1999 I
mean that wasn't long after the OJ
Simpson trial where that was on day in
and day out on the news 24/7 so it
wasn't like courtroom drama was out of
fashion yeah well let's put it let's put
it this way the King trial I believe was
so important because the on earth
evidence that pepper God pretty much
confirmed everything that would
everybody who really studied that case
believed you know that King towards the
end of his career alright because not
forget this King was killed something
like at about three weeks before the
Poor People's Campaign was supposed to
begin you know that was supposed to be
his remember 1963 in the march on
Washington this was supposed to be that
was for civil rights this was supposed
to be for economic rights and I don't
think there's any coincidence that the
Poor People's Campaign failed
whereas the march on Washington
succeeded okay if you take out King as
Vernon Young said in that HBO special
King in the wilderness you know says
after King was killed things kind of
fell apart well yeah okay you know
there's no surprise you know so that's
another thing to remember about that and
also the fact that is what pepper was
saying if Valentine is accurate then the
war in Vietnam with the Phoenix program
had a direct impact on King's murder
they transferred the operation you know
to the United States stateside now I
advise everybody if you really want to
try and understand this you know I've
kind of just skimmed it okay but if you
get the probe CD I think that has get
that I'm positive it has Jim's article
in it okay
if you want to get the book the
assassinations that has Jim's article in
it and it was if you had to boil it down
it looked like on the operational level
that it was a three sided conspiracy
between two CIA
I believe Raul was a CIA operator
military intelligence as the Hitman and
the mob a guy named Frank Liberto
supposedly paid showers a hundred
thousand dollars to go along with the
conspiracy now today a hundred thousand
dollars doesn't sound like a lot of
money but it'd be the equivalent back in
1968 of about eight hundred and fifty
grand okay so he got paid off royally to
just you know give somebody a rifle and
give back somebody a rifle and that's
essentially how it worked all right so I
give Jim Douglas all the credit in the
world that he deserves for being the
only guy in that trial day after day and
he assembled a marvelous report on it
yeah I think that was great I think it
was a good overview of the case and the
media's reaction to it
okay thank thank you so much David great
thanks
this is our hidden history
you